.. _kpp-commands:

############
KPP commands
############

A KPP command begins on a new line with a :code:`#` sign, followed by a
command name and one or more parameters.  Details about each command
are given in the following subsections.

.. _table-cmd-defaults:

.. list-table:: Default values for KPP commands
   :align: center
   :header-rows: 1

   * - KPP command
     - default value
     - KPP command
     - default value
   * - :command:`#AUTOREDUCE`
     - :code:`OFF`
     - :command:`#CHECKALL`
     -
   * - :command:`#DECLARE`
     - :code:`SYMBOL`
     - :command:`#DOUBLE`
     - :code:`ON`
   * - :command:`#DRIVER`
     - :code:`none`
     - :command:`#DUMMYINDEX`
     - :code:`OFF`
   * - :command:`#EQNTAGS`
     - :code:`OFF`
     - :command:`#FUNCTION`
     - :code:`AGGREGATE`
   * - :command:`#GRAPH`
     - :code:`OFF`
     - :command:`#HESSIAN`
     - :code:`ON`
   * - :command:`#INCLUDE`
     -
     - :command:`#INTEGRATOR`
     -
   * - :command:`#INTFILE`
     -
     - :command:`#JACOBIAN`
     - :code:`SPARSE_LU_ROW`
   * - :command:`#LANGUAGE`
     -
     - :command:`#LOOKATALL`
     -
   * - :command:`#MEX`
     - :code:`ON`
     - :command:`#MINVERSION`
     -
   * - :command:`#MODEL`
     -
     - :command:`#REORDER`
     - :code:`ON`
   * - :command:`#STOCHASTIC`
     - :code:`OFF`
     - :command:`#STOICMAT`
     - :code:`ON`
   * - :command:`#UPPERCASEF90`
     - :code:`OFF`
     -
     -

.. _autoreduce-cmd:

===========
#AUTOREDUCE
===========

The :command:`#AUTOREDUCE ON` command can be used with
:command:`#INTEGRATOR rosenbrock` to enable
:ref:`automatic  mechanism reduction <rosenbrock-autoreduce>` as
described in :cite:t:`Lin_et_al._2022`.  Automatic mechanism reduction
is disabled by default.

.. _declare-cmd:

========
#DECLARE
========

The :command:`#DECLARE` command determines how constants like
:code:`dp`, :code:`NSPEC`, :code:`NVAR`, :code:`NFIX`, and
:code:`NREACT` are inserted into the KPP-generated code.
:command:`#DECLARE SYMBOL` (the default) will declare array variables
using parameters from the :ref:`Parameters` file. :command:`#DECLARE VALUE`
will replace each parameter with its value.

For example, the global array variable :code:`C` is declared in the
:ref:`Global` file generated by KPP.  In the :program:`small_strato`
example (described in :ref:`running-kpp-with-an-example-mechanism`),
:code:`C` has dimension :code:`NSPEC=7`. Using  :command:`#DECLARE
SYMBOL` will generate the following code in :ref:`Global`:

.. code-block:: fortran

   ! C - Concentration of all species
     REAL(kind=dp), TARGET :: C(NSPEC)

Whereas :command:`#DECLARE VALUE` will generate this code instead:

.. code-block:: fortran

   ! C - Concentration of all species
     REAL(kind=dp), TARGET :: C(7)

We recommend using :command:`#DECLARE SYMBOL`, as most modern compilers
will automatically replace each parameter (e.g. :code:`NSPEC`) with its
value (e.g :code:`7`). However, if you are using a very old compiler
that is not as sophisticated, :command:`#DECLARE VALUE` might result in
better-optmized code.

.. _double-cmd:

=======
#DOUBLE
=======

The :command:`#DOUBLE` command selects single or double precision
arithmetic. :command:`ON` (the default) means use double precision,
:command:`OFF` means use single precision (see the section entitled
:ref:`Precision`).

.. important::

   We recommend using double precision whenever possible.  Using
   single precision may lead to integration non-convergence errors
   caused by roundoff and/or underflow.

.. _driver-cmd:

=======
#DRIVER
=======

The :command:`#DRIVER` command selects the driver, i.e., the file from
which the main function is to be taken. The parameter is a file name,
without suffix. The appropriate suffix (:code:`.f90`, :code:`.F90`,
:code:`.c`, or :code:`.m`) is automatically appended.

Normally, KPP tries to find the selected driver file in the directory
:file:`$KPP_HOME/drv/`. However, if the supplied file name contains a slash,
it is assumed to be absolute. To access a driver in the current
directory, the prefix :file:`./` can be used, e.g.:

.. code-block:: console

   #DRIVER ./mydriver

It is possible to choose the empty dummy driver :command:`none`, if the
user wants to include the KPP generated modules into a larger model
(e.g. a general circulation or a chemical transport model) instead of
creating a stand-alone version of the chemical integrator. The driver
:command:`none` is also selected when the :command:`#DRIVER` command
is missing. If the command occurs twice, the second replaces the first.

.. _dummyindex-cmd:

===========
#DUMMYINDEX
===========

It is possible to declare species in the :ref:`defvar-and-deffix`
sections that are not used in the :ref:`equations` section. If your
model needs to check at run-time if a certain species is included in
the current mechanism, you can set to :command:`#DUMMYINDEX ON`. Then,
KPP will set the indices to zero for all species that do not occur in
any reaction. With :command:`#DUMMYINDEX OFF` (the default), those are
undefined variables. For example, if you frequently switch between
mechanisms with and without sulfuric acid, you can use this code:

.. code-block:: fortran

   IF (ind_H2SO4=0) THEN
     PRINT *, 'no H2SO4 in current mechanism'
   ELSE
     PRINT *, 'c(H2SO4) =', C(ind_H2SO4)
   ENDIF

.. _eqntags-cmd:

========
#EQNTAGS
========

Each reaction in the :ref:`equations` section may start with an
equation tag which is enclosed in angle brackets, e.g.:

.. code-block:: console

   <R1> NO2 + hv = NO + O3P :  6.69e-1*(SUN/60.0);

With :command:`#EQNTAGS` set to :command:`ON`, this equation tag can be
used to refer to a specific equation (cf. :ref:`monitor`). The default
for :command:`#EQNTAGS` is :command:`OFF`.

.. _function-cmd:

=========
#FUNCTION
=========

The :command:`#FUNCTION` command controls which functions are generated
to compute the production/destruction terms for variable
species. :command:`AGGREGATE` generates one function that computes the
normal derivatives. :command:`SPLIT` generates two functions
for the derivatives in production and destruction forms.

.. _graph-cmd:

======
#GRAPH
======

Off by default, the :command:`#GRAPH` command leverages the
pre-existing  parsing of stoichiometric structure to create
graph-based representations of the chemical mechanism.
:command:`#GRAPH` currently supports two options, described below.

.. _graph-cmd-stoic:

#GRAPH stoic
------------

This option generates two CSV files describing the structure of the
mechanism based on stoichiometric balances and species composition.

1. :file:`ROOT_BiadjacencyMatrix.csv`: A sparse matrix of the
   the net stoichiometric coefficients for each species in each
   reaction.

   .. list-table:: Structure of :file:`ROOT_BiadjacencyMatrix.csv`
      :header-rows: 1
      :widths: 10 30 60

      * - Column
        - Header
        - Description
      * - 1
        - spc_name
        - Species name.
      * - 2
        - species_index
        - Number of the species in the chemical mechanism
      * - 3
	- reaction_index
        - Number of the reaction in the chemical mechanism
      * - 4
	- stoichiometric_coefficient
	- The the net, weighted biadjacency matrix of the bipartite
	  species-reaction graph, useful for automated detection of
	  system-wide stoichiometric invariants and other mass
	  conservation enforcing :cite:`Sturm_and_Wexler_2022`.

2. :file:`ROOT_SpeciesCompositionMatrix.csv`: This is a species
   composition dense matrix that for each variable species (row),
   records the atom count of each element present (columns).

   .. list-table:: Structure of :file:`ROOT_SpeciesCompositionMatrix.csv`
      :header-rows: 1
      :widths: 15 20 65

      * - Column
        - Name
        - Description
      * - 1
        - species_index
        - Number of the species in the chemical mechanism
      * - 2
        - species_name
        - Species name.
      * - 3 - NSPEC
        - Species matrix
        - One column for each atom present in the mechanism (including
          IGNORE if used for some species). This matrix can be used
          for automated mass balance checking of mechanism output or
          individual reactions :cite:`Sturm_and_Silva_2025`.

.. _graph-cmd-edgelist:

#GRAPH edgelist
---------------

The :ref:`graph-cmd-stoic` option uses net stoichiometry, which
neglects reciprocal reactions (e.g. when the same species is a
reactant and a product its net stoichiometry is zero). This
:command:`#GRAPH edgelist` option generates a
:file:`ROOT_Edgelist.csv` file listing the edges of the
species-reaction bipartite graph.  Each row represents a connection
between a species and a reaction, with direction and stoichiometric
value.

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 10 20 70

   * - Column
     - Name
     - Description
   * - 1
     - species_index
     - Species index (starts from 1)
   * - 2
     - reaction_index
     - Reaction index (starts from 1)
   * - 3
     - From
     - Starting edge
   * - 4
     - To
     - Ending edge
   * - 5
     - Stoichometric value
     - Directed stoichiometric value

.. _hessian-cmd:

========
#HESSIAN
========

The option :command:`ON` (the default) of the :command:`#HESSIAN`
command turns the Hessian generation on (see section
:ref:`Hessian-and-HessianSP`). With :command:`OFF` it is switched off.

.. _include-cmd:

========
#INCLUDE
========

The :command:`#INCLUDE` command instructs KPP to look for the file
specified as a parameter and parse the content of this file before
proceeding to the next line. This allows the atoms definition, the
species definition and the equation definition to be shared between
several models. Moreover this allows for custom configuration of KPP to
accommodate various classes of users. Include files can be either in one
of the KPP directories or in the current directory.

.. _integrator-cmd:

===========
#INTEGRATOR
===========

The :command:`#INTEGRATOR` command selects the integrator definition
file. The parameter is the file name of an integrator, without
suffix. The effect of

.. code-block:: console

   #INTEGRATOR integrator_name

is similar to:

.. code-block:: console

   #INCLUDE $KPP_HOME/int/integrator_name.def

The :command:`#INTEGRATOR` command allows the use of different
integration techniques on the same model. If it occurs twice, the second
replaces the first. Normally, KPP tries to find the selected integrator
files in the directory :file:`$KPP_HOME/int/`. However, if the supplied
file name contains a slash, it is assumed to be absolute. To access an
integrator in the current directory, the prefix :file:`./` can be used,
e.g.:

.. code-block:: console

   #INTEGRATOR ./mydeffile

.. _intfile-cmd:

========
#INTFILE
========

.. attention::

   :command:`#INTFILE` is used internally by KPP but should not be used
   by the KPP user. Using :ref:`integrator-cmd` alone suffices to
   specify an integrator.

The integrator definition file selects an integrator file with
:command:`#INTFILE` and also defines some suitable options for it. The
:command:`#INTFILE` command selects the file that contains the integrator
routine. The parameter of the
command is a file name, without suffix. The appropriate suffix
(:code:`.f90`, :code:`.F90`, :code:`.c`, or :code:`.m` is appended and
the result selects the file from which the integrator
is taken. This file will be copied into the code file in the appropriate
place.

.. _jacobian-cmd:

=========
#JACOBIAN
=========

The :command:`#JACOBIAN` command controls which functions are generated
to compute the Jacobian. The option :command:`OFF` inhibits the
generation of the Jacobian routine. The option :command:`FULL` generates
the Jacobian as a square :code:`NVAR x NVAR` matrix. It should only be
used if the integrator needs the whole Jacobians. The options
:command:`SPARSE_ROW` and :command:`SPARSE_LU_ROW` (the default) both
generate the Jacobian in sparse (compressed on rows) format. They should
be used if the integrator needs the whole Jacobian, but in a sparse
form. The format used is compressed on rows. With
:command:`SPARSE_LU_ROW`, KPP extends the number of nonzeros to account
for the fill-in due to the LU decomposition.

.. _language-cmd:

=========
#LANGUAGE
=========

.. attention::

   The :command:`Fortran77` language option is deprecated in
   :ref:`kpp250` and  later versions. All further KPP development will
   only support Fortran90.

The :command:`#LANGUAGE` command selects the target language in which the
code file is to be generated. Available options are :command:`Fortran90`,
:command:`C`, or :command:`matlab`.

You can select the suffix (:code:`.F90` or :code:`.f90`) to use for
Fortran90 source code generated by KPP (cf. :ref:`uppercasef90-cmd`).

.. _mex-cmd:

====
#MEX
====

:program:`Mex` is a Matlab extension that allows
to call functions written in Fortran and C directly from within the
Matlab environment. KPP generates the mex interface routines for the
ODE function, Jacobian, and Hessian, for the target languages C,
Fortran77, and Fortran90. The default is :command:`#MEX ON`. With
:command:`#MEX OFF`, no Mex files are generated.

.. _minversion-cmd:

===========
#MINVERSION
===========

You may restrict a chemical mechanism to use a given version of KPP or
later. To do this, add

.. code-block:: console

   #MINVERSION X.Y.Z

to the definition file.

The version number (:code:`X.Y.Z`) adheres to the Semantic
Versioning style (https://semver.org), where :code:`X` is the major
version number, :code:`Y` is the minor version number, and :code:`Z` is the
bugfix (aka “patch”) version number.

For example, if :command:`#MINVERSION 2.4.0` is specified, then KPP will
quit with an error message unless you are using KPP 2.4.0 or later.

.. _model-cmd:

======
#MODEL
======

The chemical model contains the description of the atoms, species, and
chemical equations. It also contains default initial values for the
species and default options including a suitable integrator for the
model. In the simplest case, the main kinetic description file, i.e. the
one passed as parameter to KPP, can contain just a single line selecting
the model. KPP tries to find a file with the name of the model and the
suffix :file:`.def` in the :file:`$KPP_HOME/models` subdirectory. This
file is then parsed. The content of the model definition file is written
in the KPP language. The model definition file points to a species file
and an equation file. The species file includes further the atom
definition file. All default values regarding the model are
automatically selected. For convenience, the best integrator and driver
for the given model are also automatically selected.

The :command:`#MODEL` command is optional, and intended for using a
predefined model. Users who supply their own reaction mechanism do not
need it.

.. _reorder-cmd:

========
#REORDER
========

Reordering of the species is performed in order to minimize the fill-in
during the LU factorization, and therefore preserve the sparsity
structure and increase efficiency. The reordering is done using a
diagonal Markowitz algorithm. The details are explained in
:cite:t:`Sandu_et_al._1996`. The default is :command:`ON`.
:command:`OFF` means that KPP does not reorder the species. The order
of the variables is the order in which the species are
declared in the :command:`#DEFVAR` section.

.. _stochastic-cmd:

===========
#STOCHASTIC
===========

The option :command:`ON` of the :command:`#STOCHASTIC` command turns
on the generation of code for stochastic kinetic simulations (see the
section entitled :ref:`Stochastic`.  The default option is :command:`OFF`.

.. _stoicmat-cmd:

=========
#STOICMAT
=========

Unless the :command:`#STOICMAT` command is set to :command:`OFF`, KPP
generates code for the stoichiometric matrix, the vector of reactant
products in each reaction, and the partial derivative of the time
derivative function with respect to rate coefficients
(cf. :ref:`Stoichiom-and-StoichiomSP`).

.. _checkall-lookatall-cmd:

=====================
#CHECKALL, #LOOKATALL
=====================

The shorthand commands :command:`#CHECKALL` and :command:`#LOOKATALL`
apply :command:`#CHECK` and :command:`#LOOKAT`, respectively, to all
species in the mechanism.

.. _uppercasef90-cmd:

=============
#UPPERCASEF90
=============

If you have selected :command:`#LANGUAGE Fortran90` option, KPP will
generate source code ending in :code:`.f90` by default. Setting
:command:`#UPPERCASEF90 ON` will tell KPP to generate Fortran90 code
ending in :code:`.F90` instead.
